The lord who we now know as Uesugi Kenshin, Dragon of Echigo, supposed manifestation of Bishamonten on earth, victor of Tedorigawa, did not start out life as an Uesugi clansman. Far from it: he was born in 1530 as Nagao Kagetora, fourth and youngest son of the Uesugi enemy-turned-vassal Nagao Tamekage, who had effective control over much of Echigo. Tamekage at the time was attempting to fend off attacks on western Echigo by forces from Honganji, the populist Buddhist order which took over Kaga Province in 1530. One clash between the Nagao-Uesugi and Honganji left Kagetora dead, and his former domains came under the control of his son Harukage. However, Harukage was not without enemies - one of his younger brothers was killed in the brief power struggle that led to Harukage assuming leadership of the clan, for example - and some of his retainers started looking for an alternative candidate. In 1544, they eventually found one in Kagetora, who had been hidden away in a temple for seven years, starting a second civil war in Echigo that eventually ended with Kagetora successfully taking over the province in 1547.

At the same time, the Uesugi proper, in Musashi [modern day Tokyo and Saitama prefectures] and Kozuke [Gunma] provinces, were suffering. The Hojo clan, rising stars of the Kanto, had expanded greatly since they seized their first province (Izu) in 1493, first capturing Sagami [Kanagawa] and then expanding into the central Kanto at the expense of the nominal rulers, the Uesugi. Eventually, in 1551, the Hojo took the Uesugi's chief castle - Hirai in Kozuke - and the clan head, Uesugi Norimasa, was forced to seek refuge with his erstwhile Nagao vassals. As the Nagao at the time were effectively independent and had expanded to cover all of Echigo, Kagetora was able to force Norimasa to accept him as his heir and give him his official titles, thus effectively combining the Uesugi and Nagao clans into one 'bloodline' with Kagetora at the centre. In return, Norimasa was given shelter in Echigo and what was effectively a promise to restore Kozuke to 'Uesugi' rule.

Kagetora's Nagao-Uesugi then focused its attention on matters concerning Shinano [Nagano], just south of Echigo, where Kagetora's soon-to-be-rival, Takeda Harunobu of Kai [Yamanashi], had just changed his name to Takeda Shingen and was busy expanding his domain far into the Shinano mountains. The leaders of two displaced Shinano clans, the Murakami and Ogasawara, came to Kagetora asking for support against the expansionist Takeda, and Kagetora agreed, pushing into Shinano in 1553 and eventually meeting the Takeda army at a place called Kawanakajima, situated where the Sai and Chikuma rivers meet in northern Shinano. This would be the first of the famous battles of Kawanakajima: despite, or perhaps because of, the two warlords' renowned rivalry, the Takeda-Uesugi border did not actually change that much in the mid-Sengoku, with both finding more success on other fronts. The front line, therefore, remained close to Kawanakajima, and the second and third battles bearing that name were fought in 1555 and 1557.

In 1559, Kagetora took what was effectively a break from Kawanakajima and the Shinano front by travelling to Kyoto to pay tribute to the (in fact powerless) official shogun. While in Kyoto, he visited various important sites (because even Sengoku warlords can be tourists sometimes?) and adopted the Buddhist name "Kenshin". Upon returning to Echigo, he decided to follow Uesugi Norimasa's preferred line of attack and advance into Hojo holdings in Kozuke. The campaign was initially very successful, with Kenshin's forces rapidly advancing south through Kozuke and capturing a castle in northern Musashi. Next was Kamakura, the former shogunal capital, where he visited the shrine at Tsurugaoka and officially adopted the Uesugi name and Norimasa's old titles. He then advanced, with the aid of several smaller Kanto clans threatened by the Hojo, on the Hojo capital at Odawara, where he lay siege to the castle for two months. However, lack of supplies and a threat from Shingen in the north led him to withdraw without taking the Hojo capital. (You may think that this led to lasting Uesugi-Hojo enmity. But it didn't; when Shingen attacked the Hojo in 1569, the Hojo daimyo requested help from Kenshin)

Upon returning to Echigo, Kenshin was able to capture the eastern half of the neighbouring province of Etchu [Toyama] by taking advantage of internal strife in that province, and then turned his attention to Shinano once again. This was the campaign that led to his most famous battle, the fourth battle of Kawanakajima, an epic clash of warriors and tactics that - legend has it - involved Shingen and Kenshin facing off in single combat part of the way through. However, it seems most likely that the battle ended in a draw, despite several thousands of casualties on both sides. There would follow one more Kawanakajima battle, in 1564, and a few minor battles with Shingen around the Kozuke border, but both rivals focused their attention on other threats for the most part after 1561. That is not to say they did not interact after that: Shingen, after having the salt supply to his landlocked domain cut off by the Hojo, was given some unlikely help by Kenshin, who permitted his merchants to sell salt to the Takeda - but not at extortionate prices.




By 1576, Kenshin had started to focus his attention on the west of his domain rather than on the south as it had been before. The Takeda and Hojo had been fighting each other since the late 1560s, and besides, the Takeda had passed their peak: Shingen had died in 1573, an event which apparently deeply upset Kenshin, and had been replaced by his arrogant and overconfident son Katsuyori. The Takeda army had been routed by the now extremely powerful Oda Nobunaga in 1575, and the Oda had started to invade Shinano and Kai. Kenshin and Nobunaga had not been enemies previously, due to both being opponents of the Takeda; however, Nobunaga's increased power and Shingen's death removed the need for cooperation, and the two warlords both had designs on the same stretch of Japan Sea coast. Furthermore, both Nobunaga and Kenshin had a valid casus belli to march on Kyoto: the desperate Ashikaga shogunate had appealed to both in the hope that they could drive out rebellious local clans from the Kinai [western Kansai], and while Nobunaga had been able to seize the opportunity early on, Kenshin was forced to wait until 1576 due to the previous threats from the Takeda and Hojo.

Kenshin started his western campaign by swiftly annexing the western half of Etchu, bringing the entire province under his control, and then set his sights on Noto. The ruler of that province, Hatakeyama Yoshinori, had been overthrown by a retainer, and the province was beset by fighting between supporters of the rightful Hatakeyama heir and those of the usurper. All this made it easier for Kenshin to quickly take first the Hatakeyama chief castle and then the usurper's, giving him effective control of Noto.

The next province on the way to Kyoto was Kaga [southern Ishikawa]. This was Honganji's power base, but Honganji - at least in Kaga - had been weakened by incursions from Nobunaga to the south, and by the time Kenshin arrived at the province the real war for Kaga was between himself and Nobunaga. The two great daimyo eventually met near the Tedori River in central Kaga. Kenshin sent a small force out to secure his bank of the river, while making said force known to Nobunaga on the other bank. Nobunaga then thought Kenshin was splitting his forces, and decided to attack... across the river, with the defenses being better on the Uesugi side. Despite it being very possible that the Oda army had 20,000 more warriors in it, Kenshin prevailed, forcing Nobunaga to retreat back as far as Omi [Shiga] while Kenshin secured Kaga.

Uesugi Kenshin thus became the only daimyo of the Sengoku period to fight a war with Oda Nobunaga - the first great unifier of Japan - and win. After Tedorigawa, he made the baffling decision to go back to Echigo, possibly to launch another campaign against the Hojo, who he may have perceived as a greater threat than Nobunaga. The reverse, however, was not necessarily true: after Tedorigawa, Nobunaga even offered to cede the entire Sea of Japan coast to Kenshin in exchange for a promise not to try and take Kyoto. However, Kenshin would never capitalise on his great victory: he died in mysterious circumstances in April of 1578, just as he was about to launch his next campaign. Whether it was an assassination (his death was very lucky indeed for the Oda!), an assassination in the toilet (!), or just illness brought on by his love of sake, Kenshin left behind two feuding adopted sons and a mountain of what-ifs.

The succession dispute that followed Kenshin's death plunged the Uesugi domains into chaos, allowing Nobunaga to take Kaga and Noto and threaten Echigo in the process. Echigo was only saved by Nobunaga's own death, and his effective successor Toyotomi Hideyoshi eventually incorporated Echigo into his new unified Japan peacefully, with Uesugi Kagekatsu keeping the province and Kenshin's memory alive.